So far we've had a cursory look at our data set and checked for missing data.
Now we're going to start looking at our data in a bit more detail.
One of the most useful things to do as part of exploring it is to visualize it.
It's true they say you know a picture is worth a thousand words and data visualizations don't just come
in handy when it comes to say presenting a snazzy final report to your boss your team or your client
data visualizations.
Also help us make sense of our data at the exploration stage.
How so.
Well there's two things that we want to get a sense for right now.
The first is the distribution of the data and the second are outliers in our data.
So what kind of visualization could we use at the exploration stage to spot both outliers and see the
distribution.
Well enter our friend the humble histogram the good old histogram is the first data visualization technique
that we're going to cover histogram so pretty simple.
This just shows the number of instances in the data that have a certain value a histogram is just a
bar chart that shows us the frequency of a particular value in the screen histogram.
We've got the values on the x axis and the number of occurrences on the y axis the taller an individual
bar the more occurrences there are in the dataset.
And by plotting all the bars next to each other we get a certain shape that shape is the distribution
of our data.
Now I've created the screen histogram here to show you what a normal distribution would look like.
You can always spot a normal distribution by this very reassuring bell curve meaning a lot of the observations
are around the center or the mean of the distribution.
And very few observations are at the edges.
The reason that we care about distributions in the first place is because they tell us a great deal
about our data for this dataset on Boston house prices.
That's 13 independent variables including everything from the average number of rooms to zoning restrictions
to the pupil teacher ratio in the schools.
And each of these variables is measured differently and a histogram is a good starting point for understanding
what these features are how they're measured and what the data actually looks like.
Another reason why I bring up distributions at this stage is that many statistical tests and estimation
techniques make certain assumptions about the kind of distribution.
Now we're going to revisit this concept at the analysis stage when it comes to our regression residuals
and it'll be very interesting to see what kind of distributions those have.
So this is something to keep in mind for later we're gonna see if we get a bell shaped curve like this
at the analysis stage or not.
Now let me ask you a question.
What do you think the distribution of house prices will look like in our dataset.
If you had to imagine the distribution of house prices in your head what would it look like spoiler
alert.
T house prices are going to look nothing like this Green has the ground right here.
In fact the distribution of prices looks like this as you can see it's much more messy right.
Well that's real data for you and also our data has outliers at the right hand edge of this distribution
in normal distribution has very very few observations but the actual house prices have some pretty high
balls right here.
Now I'm not sure which houses these are in Boston but the people living there are pretty well off to
say at least.
All right.
So now it's time to write some python code and learn how to draw histogram is like this because I suspect
you're not just going to take my word for it when it comes to these charts.
So let's head back to Jupiter notebook.
Let's start by inserting a markdown cell and putting the following subheading here visualizing data
his two grams distributions and bar charts.
Now to draw a histogram in our notebook we're gonna make use of the matte plot lib module so we're gonna
have to add some input statements at the very top.
When a scroll of up and I'm going to add the following import statements import Matt.
Plot lib dot pie plot as P L T and at the end I'm also going to add the percentage sign.
Matt.
Plot lib space in line.
And let me hit shift enter.
Now this last line.
If you recall was so that our chance would show up when we export our notebooks.
So this line of code is really stupid and notebook specific.
Now to draw our histogram we're going to use our map plot lib module and call the Hist function.
So we're gonna write BLT dot hist open parentheses.
And now we need to supply some arguments.
The first input to this function is what should be plotted on the histogram in our case.
We're gonna start plotting the values from our target namely the house prices that are given in thousands.
This was inside our data frames price column.
If you remember so when I write data
square brackets and then the string price in all caps on the next line on a put peel t Don show and
hit shift into and this is the output that will get now.
The thing about this histogram function is that we can supply more arguments to customize the look and
feel of our histogram.
For example we can supply an argument called beans and beans is going to determine how our prices are
grouped together to form the individual balls.
So we put beans equal to three and hedge shift enter.
If we put beans as equal to three then we only get three parts.
All our house prices are grouped into one of these three bars.
Now this might be a little difficult for you to see.
So what I'm going to do is I'm going to make my chart larger.
First of all so we can do this with BLT dot figure parentheses fig size and then supply a tuple.
When I say 10 and 6.
So this is gonna make my chart a lot larger.
But I want to make this more explicit still.
I want to show a black outline of the actual beans in this chart.
So there's something called Edge color E C that I can supply as an argument to this histogram function.
Want to say e c is equal to and then the string black and now my histogram will look like this.
So now we can really see that I've only got three bins all our house prices either grouped in to this
first group here up to twenty thousand or the second bar here between 20 and say 35000 or this third
by here between 35000 and fifty thousand dollars.
Now of course you can play around with this input here.
So we could also go the other extreme right.
We could have I don't know 100 different bins hitting shift enter on this will make r chant look like
so in other words setting the number of bins we can set how granular we want our histogram to look.
I tell you what I'm going to go with 50
I think 50 is a good compromise between three and three hundred and this conveys the information in
the price column quite nicely.
Now if you come back to this chant in three months time you're probably not going to know what it's
showing.
So let's add some labels on the axes.
So I want to write PDT dot X label parentheses price in thousands and peel T don't y label parentheses
number of houses and I went out to format this as a string I can't put it in there like so.
So I need single quotes at the beginning and a single quote at the end.
Now let me hit shift enter and walla.
It's a lot more clear.
We've got the frequency on the left hand the dollar price in thousands on the x axis so far so good
right.
But wait what was that.
Did I just hear you say you want to style this histogram to make it look prettier.
Okay okay let me try and channel my inner designer and choose a different color to do that I'm going
to add another argument to my function call here and that argument is gonna be called Surprise Surprise
color and it's also gonna be set equal to a string.
Now I can add a hex code here as an input and how it turns out that my inner designer is actually super
lazy and recommended that I use a Web site like material palette to pick a color instead.
So you can see that this is just one of the many Web sites that creates a color palette for you.
And I want to pick this blue one here.
These two blue colors and then I'm just going to copy this hex code right here and this is the hex code
that I'm then going to paste in has an argument for the color right here.
Let's see what this looks like.
Voila.
Cool.
So I think we've got a really nice histogram here from Matt plot lib.
And now you can also see for yourself that the histogram here ties out with what I've showed you earlier
on the slide.
Trust but verify.
All right.
You know apparently the saying was Ronald Reagan's favorite Russian proverb.
Trust but verify if you happen to know any other funky Russian proverbs.
Please do let me know in the Courtenay section but moving on.
The thing is we're actually not stuck with just using math pot lid before data is.
There are quite a few other lovely Python modules out there that do a fantastic job at data visualization
and I can't wait to introduce you to an alternative to Mac plot lib.
And that's a module called seaborne.